# Oral questions year 2024

Since academic year 23/24 the course is held by Stea ( Probability and QT) and Nardini (Laboratory and Sim/OMNET++), not sure if Virdis questions are still reliable. First question is always from Stea, second from Nardini.

## 1st call

### Question 1

Burke's theorem. State its thesis and a proof sketch. Discuss its consequences.

### Question 2

Consider a system including a a client and da server communicating directly. The client generates a request every k seconds and sends it to the server. The latter can process one request at a time and takes s seconds to do that. The server has one queue that can contain at most N requests. When the server receives a new request:

- if it is idle, then it starts processing the request immediately;

- if it is busy and the queue is full, then it discards the request;

- if it is busy and the queue is not full, then it enqueues the request.

Once the request has been served, it is removed from the system and the next request is fetched from the queue, if the latter is not empty. The queue is managed according to a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) policy.

The above system should be implemented using the OMNET++ framework as a reference. The goal of the implementation is to measure the mean percentage of occupancy of the server's queue. In particular:

1. Describe graphically the structure of both the nodes and the network, highlighting the relevant elements;

2. Provide the pseudocode implementation of the server logic, paying specific attention on the implementation of the metric described above.

## 2nd call

### Question 1

Definition of simulation clock; explain the difference between handling simulation time using next-event approach and quantum-based approach. A practical example was given, it was requested to put in a timeline the events of the example, highlighting the differences between the two approaches.

### Question 2

PGF: definition, properties, PGF of a poissonian RV

## 3rd call

### Question 1

Describe the exponential function and its properties.

### Question 2

To calculate the resulting tree of the events after a re-heapification.

## 4th call

N/A

## 5th call

### Question 1

Describe the exponential distribution, CDF, PDF, components and properties.

### Question 2

N clients and one server, the clients send jobs with *Gold* or *silver* priority, the server always takes D seconds to do the job and always gives priority to *Gold* jobs. he wanted to know what information the message that the client sent to the server should contain, what data structures the server should use, what events the server should handle and then a pseudo-code/flowchart of the handlingmessage()